v2.0-MIGRATION-GUIDE.md, before:


# PhysicsNeMo v2.0 Migration Guide

This document is meant to inform users of physicsnemo of high level changes
to the repository, provide a little background on why they were necessary,
and give you some guidance on updating your code.

> This guide is a work in progress.  Please come back later for more information.

## Core Reorganization

The core packages of physicsnemo have been reorganized to prevent circular
imports.  For most uses, the key changes are:

1. `physicsnemo.models.Module` and `physicsnemo.models.Meta` are now in
   `physicsnemo.core`.
2. `physicsnemo.launch` is completely deprecated and removed.  Logging functionality
   is now in `physicsnemo.utils.logging`, while checkpoint functionality is now
   in `physicsnemo.utils.checkpoint`
3. Many layer-like components have been migrated to `physicsnemo.nn`, from
   both `physicsnemo.models` and from `physicsnemo.utils`
4. Model-specific utility functions have been relocated to adjacent to their
   corresponding model.  For example, `physicsnemo.utils.domino` now is located
   at `physicsnemo.models.domino.utils`.
5. Domain Parallelism has been separated from distributed utilities to provide
   better isolation for users of just the distributed utilities.  `ShardTensor`
   is now located in `physicsnemo.domain_parallelism`.

## New Packages

Several new packages have been introduced for PhysicsNeMo v2.0.  At a high level:

1. `physicsnemo.nn` contains reusable, pytorch-like modules for building blocks
   of layers.  `physicsnemo.nn.functional` contains a functional interface to
   these layers, where appropriate.
2. `physicsnemo.domain_parallel` contains the `ShardTensor` object and utilities.
3. [TBD] `physicsnemo.diffusion`
4. [TBD] `physicsnemo.mesh`

## Packaging, Installation, and Dependencies

The core dependencies of `physicsnemo` have been identified and consolidated.
Optional dependencies are now aggressively protected throughout the code base.
Circular imports inside the code base have been fixed, and external imports
have additional requirements to be met before introducing them.

`uv` is now the preferred way to install and develop with physicsnemo. `pip`
is still a viable installation method.

## Model Standardization

[TBD]

## PhysicsNeMo Datapipes

[TBD]

## Updating your code

To update your code for physicsnemo v2.0, you will need to adjust several key
import paths (like `logging`, see above) and potentially update datapipes
and model checkpoints.

## Reporting questions, concerns, or comments

Please contact the development team via github issues on the physicsnemo repository.

Commit message:

PhysicsNemo Datapipes (#1304)
* Passing tests for datapipes

* Fix datapipe tests

* First pass at examples, not quite ready yet.

* Add datapipe tutorials.

* Update migration guide.

* Update codeowners for datapipes.

* Address greptile review comments

* Fix failing datapipe tests

* Update physicsnemo/datapipes/core/transforms/base.py

Co-authored-by: Peter Sharpe <peterdsharpe@gmail.com>

* Update physicsnemo/datapipes/core/readers/hdf5.py

Co-authored-by: Peter Sharpe <peterdsharpe@gmail.com>

* Add more transform functionality; implement hydra registry.

* Remove ZeroLike

* Clean up tests.

* Update typing, docstrings, and some test coverage.  Align on some PR feedback.

* ADdress more PR review comments

* Increase unit test coverage of datapipes

* Update tutorials to ipynb format

* Remove python script tutorial for ipynb

* Use auto device for tutorial 4

* Update notebooks to plot histograms and use less boring initial distributions

* Enable numpy storage too

* Update datapipe testing for shapes

* DiT/NATTEN and PositionalEmbedding fixes (#1343)

* DiT/NATTEN and PositionalEmbedding fixes

* Add pos embed tests

* format

---------

Co-authored-by: Peter Harrington <pharrington@nvidia.com>

* Refactor dlwp_healpix for model standards compliance (#1321)

* Refactor dlwp_healpix for compliance

* Update configs, tests

* linting

* Update ruff cfg

* Update importlinter

* Add backward-compat capability

* Docstring fixes, note on hpx pooling

* Update CODEOWNERS (#1340)

* Enforce zarr >= 3.0.0

* Fix distributed manager call.

* Flatten the datapipes directory

* Update examples to use flattened structure

* Fix the doctests

---------

Co-authored-by: Peter Sharpe <peterdsharpe@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: Jussi Leinonen <jleinonen@nvidia.com>
Co-authored-by: Peter Harrington <pharrington@nvidia.com>
Co-authored-by: Peter Harrington <48932392+pzharrington@users.noreply.github.com>

v2.0-MIGRATION-GUIDE.md, after:


# PhysicsNeMo v2.0 Migration Guide

This document is meant to inform users of physicsnemo of high level changes
to the repository, provide a little background on why they were necessary,
and give you some guidance on updating your code.

> This guide is a work in progress.  Please come back later for more information.

## Core Reorganization

The core packages of physicsnemo have been reorganized to prevent circular
imports.  For most uses, the key changes are:

1. `physicsnemo.models.Module` and `physicsnemo.models.Meta` are now in
   `physicsnemo.core`.
2. `physicsnemo.launch` is completely deprecated and removed.  Logging functionality
   is now in `physicsnemo.utils.logging`, while checkpoint functionality is now
   in `physicsnemo.utils.checkpoint`
3. Many layer-like components have been migrated to `physicsnemo.nn`, from
   both `physicsnemo.models` and from `physicsnemo.utils`
4. Model-specific utility functions have been relocated to adjacent to their
   corresponding model.  For example, `physicsnemo.utils.domino` now is located
   at `physicsnemo.models.domino.utils`.
5. Domain Parallelism has been separated from distributed utilities to provide
   better isolation for users of just the distributed utilities.  `ShardTensor`
   is now located in `physicsnemo.domain_parallelism`.

## New Packages

Several new packages have been introduced for PhysicsNeMo v2.0.  At a high level:

1. `physicsnemo.nn` contains reusable, pytorch-like modules for building blocks
   of layers.  `physicsnemo.nn.functional` contains a functional interface to
   these layers, where appropriate.
2. `physicsnemo.domain_parallel` contains the `ShardTensor` object and utilities.
3. [TBD] `physicsnemo.diffusion`
4. [TBD] `physicsnemo.mesh`
5. `physicsnemo.datapipes` brings reusable and generic utilities to standardize
GPU-centric data pipelines for SciML.

## Packaging, Installation, and Dependencies

The core dependencies of `physicsnemo` have been identified and consolidated.
Optional dependencies are now aggressively protected throughout the code base.
Circular imports inside the code base have been fixed, and external imports
have additional requirements to be met before introducing them.

`uv` is now the preferred way to install and develop with physicsnemo. `pip`
is still a viable installation method.

## Model Standardization

[TBD]

## PhysicsNeMo Datapipes

PhysicsNeMo DataPipes is a GPU-first, high-performance data loading
infrastructure for scientific machine learning that uses threading and
asynchronous execution to maximize throughput on large, high-resolution
datasets. It provides a modular architecture of readers, transforms, datasets,
and a dataloader that can be configured via Hydra YAML files for reproducibility,
while maintaining familiar PyTorch-like interfaces and easy extensibility
for custom data formats and preprocessing operations.  Check out
examples/minimal/datapipes to learn more.

## Updating your code

To update your code for physicsnemo v2.0, you will need to adjust several key
import paths (like `logging`, see above) and potentially update datapipes
and model checkpoints.

## Reporting questions, concerns, or comments

Please contact the development team via github issues on the physicsnemo repository.
